.TH OPTIPNG 1 "9 November 2008" "OptiPNG version 0.6.2"
.SH NAME
.B OptiPNG
\- Advanced optimization program for
.B Portable Network Graphics (PNG)
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B optipng
[\fB\-?\fP | \fB\-h\fP | \fB\-help\fP]
.br
.B optipng
[\fIoptions...\fP] \fIfiles...\fP
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B OptiPNG
program shall attempt to \fIoptimize\fP PNG files, i.e. reduce their size to
a minimum, without losing any information. In addition, this program shall
perform a suite of auxiliary functions like integrity checks, metadata recovery
and pixmap-to-PNG conversion.
.P
The optimization attempts are not guaranteed to succeed. Valid PNG files that
cannot be optimized by this program are normally left intact; their size will
not grow. The user may request to override this default behavior.
.SH FILES
The input files are raster image files encoded either in PNG format (the native
format), or in an external format. The currently supported external formats are
GIF, BMP, PNM and TIFF.
.P
.B OptiPNG
processes each image file given in the command line as follows:
.P
\- If it is in PNG format:
.IP
Attempt to optimize the given file in-place. If optimization is successful, or
if the option \fB\-force\fP is in effect, replace the original file with its
optimized version. The original file is backed up if the option \fB\-keep\fP
is in effect.
.P
\- If it is an external format:
.IP
Create an optimized PNG version of the given file. The output file name is
composed from the original file name and the \fC.png\fP extension.
.SH OPTIONS
.SS "Basic options"
.TP
\fB-?\fP, \fB\-h\fP, \fB\-help\fP
Show a complete summary of options.
.TP
\fB\-o\fP \fIlevel\fP
Select the optimization level.
.br
Use \fB\-o0\fP to disable IDAT recompression trials. This option has no effect
on non-PNG input files.
.br
Use \fB\-o1\fP to enable a single IDAT recompression trial.
.br
Use a higher \fIlevel\fP to enable more trials
(the higher the \fIlevel\fP, the more trials).
.br
The behavior and the default value of this option may change across different
program versions. Use option \fB\-h\fP to see the details pertaining to your
specific version.
.TP
\fB\-i\fP \fItype\fP
Select the interlace type (0\-1).
.br
Use \fB\-i0\fP to produce a non-interlaced output.
.br
Use \fB\-i1\fP to produce an interlaced (\fIAdam7\fP) output.
.br
By default, the output will have the same interlace type as the input.
.TP
\fB\-k\fP, \fB\-keep\fP
Keep a backup of the modified file(s).
.br
The files that use the backup names prior to the program execution are
\fInot\fP overwritten.
.TP
\fB\-q\fP, \fB\-quiet\fP
Run in quiet mode.
.TP
\fB\-v\fP
Show copyright, version and build info; run in verbose mode.
.SS "Advanced options"
.TP
\fB\-zc\fP \fIlevels\fP
Select the zlib compression levels.
.br
The behavior and the default value of this user option may change across
different program versions. Use option \fB\-h\fP to see the details pertaining
to your specific version.
.TP
\fB\-zm\fP \fIlevels\fP
Select the zlib memory levels.
.br
The behavior and the default value of this user option may change across
different program versions. Use option \fB\-h\fP to see the details pertaining
to your specific version.
.TP
\fB\-zs\fP \fIstrategies\fP
Select the zlib compression strategies.
.br
The behavior and the default value of this user option may change across
different program versions. Use option \fB\-h\fP to see the details pertaining
to your specific version.
.TP
\fB\-zw\fP \fIwindow size\fP
Select the zlib window size (32k,16k,8k,4k,2k,1k,512,256).
.br
The window size can be specified either in bytes (e.g. 16384) or kilobytes
(e.g. 16k).
.TP
\fB\-f\fP \fIfilters\fP
Select the PNG delta filters.
.br
The behavior and the default value of this user option may change across
different program versions. The filter values 0, 1, 2, 3, 4 correspond to
the PNG standard filters (\fINone\fP, \fILeft\fP, \fIUp\fP, \fIAverage\fP
and \fIPaeth\fP, respectively). The other values are used to specify adaptive
filtering. Use option \fB\-h\fP to see the details pertaining to your specific
version.
.TP
\fB\-nb\fP
Do not apply bit depth reduction.
.TP
\fB\-nc\fP
Do not apply color type reduction.
.TP
\fB\-np\fP
Do not apply palette reduction.
.TP
\fB\-nz\fP
Do not perform IDAT recompression (also disable reductions).
.TP
\fB\-fix\fP
Enable error recovery. This option has no effect on valid input files.
.br
The program will spend a reasonable amount of effort to recover as much data as
possible, without increasing the output file size, but the success cannot be
generally guaranteed. The program may even increase the file size, e.g., by
reconstructing missing critical data. Under this option, integrity shall take
precedence over file size.
.br
When this option is not used, the invalid input files are left unprocessed.
.TP
\fB\-force\fP
Enforce writing of a new output file.
.br
Use this option to override the program's decision not to write such file,
e.g. when the PNG input is digitally signed (using dSIG), or when the PNG
output becomes larger than the PNG input.
.TP
\fB\-full\fP
Produce a full report on IDAT.
This option might slow down the trials.
.TP
\fB\-preserve\fP
Preserve file attributes (time stamps, file access rights, etc.) where
applicable.
.TP
\fB\-simulate\fP
Run in simulation mode: perform the trials, but do not create output files.
.TP
\fB\-snip\fP
Cut one image out of multi-image, animation or video file(s).
.br
Depending on the input format, this may be either the first or the most
relevant (e.g. the largest) image.
.TP
\fB\-out\fP \fIfile\fP
Write output file to \fIfile\fP.
The command line must contain exactly one input file.
.TP
\fB\-dir\fP \fIdirectory\fP
Write output file(s) to \fIdirectory\fP.
.TP
\fB\-log\fP \fIfile\fP
Log messages to \fIfile\fP.
For safety reasons, \fIfile\fP must have the extension \fC.log\fP.
.TP
\fB\-\-\fP
Stop option switch parsing.
.SS "Notes"
Option names are case-insensitive and can be abbreviated.
Any abbreviation must uniquely identify the full option name and must be no
shorter than two letters, unless one letter is explicitly permitted. For
example, \fB\-quiet\fP can be abbreviated as \fB\-q\fP or \fB\-qu\fP (because
\fB\-q\fP is explicitly mentioned in the list of possible options), while
\fB\-preserve\fP can be abbreviated as \fB\-pr\fP but not as \fB\-p\fP.
.P
Some options may have arguments that follow the option name, with or without
a whitespace used as a separator; e.g.
.IP
\fB\-i1\fP  <=>  \fB\-i 1\fP
.br
\fB\-o3\fP  <=>  \fB\-o 3\fP
.P
Range arguments are cumulative; e.g.
.IP
\fB\-f0 \-f3\-5\fP  <=>  \fB\-f0,3\-5\fP
.br
\fB\-zs0 \-zs1 \-zs2\-3\fP  <=>  \fB\-zs0,1,2,3\fP  <=>  \fB\-zs0\-3\fP
.P
The zlib window size is automatically set to a minimum that does not affect the
compression ratio.
.P
The output files will have all IDAT in a single chunk, even if no recompression
is performed.
.P
Extremely exhaustive searches are not generally recommended.
.SH "EXTENDED DESCRIPTION"
The PNG optimization algorithm consists of the following steps:
.IP
1. Reduce the bit depth, the color type and the color palette of the image.
This step may reduce the size of the uncompressed image, which, indirectly, may
reduce the size of the compressed image (i.e. the size of the output PNG file).
.IP
2. Run a suite of compression methods and strategies and select the compression
parameters that yield the smallest output file.
.IP
3. Store all IDAT contents into a single chunk, eliminating the overhead
incurred by repeated IDAT headers and CRCs.
.IP
4. Set the zlib window size inside IDAT to a mininum that does not affect the
compression ratio, reducing the memory requirements of PNG decoders.
.P
Not all of the above steps need to be executed. The behavior depends on the
actual input files and user options.
.P
Step 1 may be customized via the no-reduce options \fB\-nb\fP, \fB\-nc\fP and
\fB\-np\fP. Step 2 may be customized via the \fB\-o\fP option, and may be
fine-tuned via the options \fB\-zc\fP, \fB\-zm\fP, \fB\-zs\fP and \fB\-zw\fP.
Step 3 is always executed; for example, even though IDAT recompression is
disabled under \fB\-o0\fP, all IDAT chunks from the input are concatenated into
a single IDAT chunk in the output. Step 4 is executed only if a new IDAT is
being created.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
\fCoptipng file1.png file2.gif file3.tif\fP
.TP
\fCoptipng \-o5 file1.png file2.gif file3.tif\fP
.TP
\fCoptipng \-i1 \-o7 \-v \-full \-sim experiment.png \-log experiment.log\fP
.SH BUGS
Lossless image reductions are not completely implemented.
(This does NOT affect the integrity of the output files.)
Here are the missing pieces:
.IP
\- The color palette reductions are implemented only partially.
.br
\- The bit depth reductions below 8, for grayscale images, are not implemented
yet.
.P
TIFF support is limited to uncompressed, PNG-compatible (grayscale, RGB and
RGBA) images.
.P
Metadata is not imported from the external image formats.
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBpng\fP(5),
\fBlibpng\fP(3),
\fBzlib\fP(3),
\fBpngcrush\fP(1),
\fBpngrewrite\fP(1).
.PP
Glenn Randers-Pehrson et al.
\fIPortable Network Graphics (PNG) Specification, Second Edition\fP.
.br
W3C Recommendation 10 November 2003; ISO/IEC IS 15948:2003 (E).
.br
\fChttp://www.w3.org/TR/PNG/\fP
.SH AUTHOR
\fBOptiPNG\fP is written and maintained by Cosmin Truta.
.PP
This manual page was originally written by Nelson A. de Oliveira
for the Debian Project. It was later updated by Cosmin Truta,
and is now part of the \fBOptiPNG\fP distribution.
