.TH OPTIPNG 1 "@DATE@" "OptiPNG version Hg"

.SH NAME
.B optipng
\- optimize Portable Network Graphics files

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B optipng
[\fB\-?\fP | \fB\-h\fP | \fB\-help\fP]
.br
.B optipng
[\fIoptions...\fP] \fIfiles...\fP

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B OptiPNG
shall attempt to \fIoptimize\fP PNG files, i.e. reduce their size to a minimum,
without losing semantic information. In addition, this program shall perform a
suite of auxiliary functions like integrity checks, metadata recovery and
pixmap-to-PNG conversion.
.P
The optimization attempts are not guaranteed to succeed. Valid PNG files that
cannot be optimized by this program are normally left intact; their size will
not grow. The user may request to override this default behavior.

.SH FILES
The input files are raster image files encoded either in PNG format (the native
format), or in an external format. The currently supported external formats are
GIF, BMP, PNM and TIFF.
.P
.B OptiPNG
processes each image file given in the command line as follows:
.P
\- If the image is in PNG format:
.IP
Attempts to optimize the given file in-place. If optimization is successful, or
if the option \fB\-force\fP is enabled, replaces the original file with its
optimized version.
.P
\- If the image is in an external format:
.IP
Creates an optimized PNG version of the given file. The output file name is
composed from the original file name and the \fC.png\fP extension.

.SH OPTIONS
.SS "General options"
.TP
\fB\-?\fP, \fB\-h\fP, \fB\-help\fP
Show a complete summary of options.
.TP
\fB\-backup\fP
Back up the modified files.
.br
The backup file name is composed from the original file name and a backup
suffix. The backup suffix is \fC.bak\fP.
.TP
\fB\-clobber\fP
This option, which has no effect, is deprecated and will be removed eventually.
.br
Starting with \fBOptiPNG\fP version 1.0, output files are clobbered by default.
Use \fB\-no\-clobber\fP to revert this setting.
.TP
\fB\-dir\fP \fIdirectory\fP
Write the output files to \fIdirectory\fP.
.TP
\fB\-fix\fP
Enable error recovery. This option has no effect on valid input files.
.br
The program will spend a reasonable amount of effort to recover as much data as
possible, without increasing the output file size, but the success cannot be
generally guaranteed. The program may even increase the file size, e.g., by
reconstructing missing critical data. Under this option, integrity shall take
precedence over file size.
.br
When this option is not used, the invalid input files are left unprocessed.
.TP
\fB\-force\fP
Enforce creation of a new output file.
.br
This option overrides the program's decision not to create such file, e.g. when
the PNG input is digitally signed (using dSIG), or when the PNG output becomes
larger than the PNG input.
.TP
\fB\-keep\fP
This option is deprecated and will be removed eventually. Use \fB\-backup\fP.
.TP
\fB\-log\fP \fIfile\fP
This option is no longer supported. Use standard shell redirection.
.TP
\fB\-no\-clobber\fP
Do not overwrite existing output or backup files.
.TP
\fB\-no\-create\fP
Perform the encoding trials, but do not create any files.
.TP
\fB\-stdout\fP
Write output to the standard console output.
.TP
\fB\-out\fP \fIfile\fP
Write output file to \fIfile\fP.
The command line must contain one input file.
.TP
\fB\-preserve\fP
Preserve file attributes (time stamps, file access rights, etc.) where
applicable.
.TP
\fB\-quiet\fP, \fB\-silent\fP
Run in quiet mode: do not show the informational messages on the console.
.TP
\fB\-simulate\fP
This option is deprecated and will be removed eventually. Use
\fB\-no\-create\fP.
.TP
\fB\-v\fP
Enable the options \fB\-verbose\fP and \fB\-version\fP.
.TP
\fB\-verbose\fP
Run in verbose mode.
.TP
\fB\-version\fP
Show copyright, version and build info.
.TP
\fB\-\-\fP
Stop option switch parsing.
.SS "PNG encoding and optimization options"
.TP
\fB\-o\fP \fIlevel\fP
Select the optimization level.
.br
The optimization level 1 is an alias to the option \fB\-fast\fP, which enables
a single IDAT compression trial.
.br
The optimization levels 2 and higher enable multiple IDAT compression trials;
the higher the level, the more trials.
.br
The behavior and the default value of this option may change across different
program versions. Use the option \fB\-help\fP to see the details pertaining to
your specific version.
.TP
\fB\-fast\fP
Select the \fIfast\fP compression level.
.br
Only one IDAT compression trial is performed. The trial chosen is what
\fBOptiPNG\fP thinks it's probably the most effective.
.br
At this level, \fBOptiPNG\fP is functionally similar to other common
single-pass PNG encoders that run at their highest and \fIslowest\fP
compression level (which, usually, is 9). Use the option \fB\-zc\fP to tailor
this level.
.TP
\fB\-fastest\fP
Select the \fIfastest\fP compression level.
.br
Only one IDAT compression trial is performed, except when encountering existing
IDAT datastreams, which are not recompressed. The trial chosen is what
\fBOptiPNG\fP thinks it's probably the fastest that can give a decent
compression ratio.
.TP
\fB\-f\fP \fIfilters\fP
Select the PNG delta filters.
.br
The \fIfilters\fP argument is specified as a rangeset (e.g. \fB\-f0\-5\fP),
and the default \fIfilters\fP value depends on the optimization level set by
the option \fB\-o\fP.
.br
The filter values 0, 1, 2, 3 and 4 indicate static filtering, and correspond to
the standard PNG filter codes (\fINone\fP, \fILeft\fP, \fIUp\fP, \fIAverage\fP
and \fIPaeth\fP, respectively). The filter value 5 indicates adaptive filtering,
whose effect is defined by the \fBlibpng\fP(3) library used by \fBOptiPNG\fP.
.TP
\fB\-full\fP
This option is deprecated and will be removed eventually. Use
\fB\-paranoid\fP.
.TP
\fB\-i\fP \fItype\fP
Select the interlace type (0\-1).
.br
If the interlace type 0 is selected, the output image shall be non-interlaced
(i.e. progressive-scanned). If the interlace type 1 is selected, the output
image shall be interlaced using the \fIAdam7\fP method.
.br
By default, the output shall have the same interlace type as the input.
.TP
\fB\-nb\fP
Do not apply bit depth reduction.
.TP
\fB\-nc\fP
Do not apply color type reduction.
.TP
\fB\-np\fP
Do not apply palette reduction.
.TP
\fB\-nx\fP
Do not apply any lossless image reduction:
enable the options \fB\-nb\fP, \fB\-nc\fP and \fB\-np\fP.
.TP
\fB\-nz\fP
Do not recode IDAT datastreams.
.br
The IDAT optimization operations that do not require recoding (e.g. IDAT
chunk concatenation) are still performed.
.br
This option has effect on PNG input files, as well as files that contain
embedded PNG datastreams, like PNG-compressed BMP files. It is ignored
otherwise.
.TP
\fB\-paranoid\fP
Encode IDAT fully and show its size in the report.
.br
This option might slow down the encoding trials, but has no effect on the final
output.
.TP
\fB\-zc\fP \fIlevels\fP
Select the zlib compression levels used in IDAT compression.
.br
The \fIlevels\fP argument is specified as a rangeset (e.g. \fB\-zc6\-9\fP),
and the default \fIlevels\fP value depends on the optimization level set by
the option \fB\-o\fP.
.br
The effect of this option is defined by the \fBzlib\fP(3) library used by
\fBOptiPNG\fP.
.TP
\fB\-zm\fP \fIlevels\fP
Select the zlib memory levels used in IDAT compression.
.br
The \fIlevels\fP argument is specified as a rangeset (e.g. \fB\-zm8\-9\fP),
and the default \fIlevels\fP value depends on the optimization level set by
the option \fB\-o\fP.
.br
The effect of this option is defined by the \fBzlib\fP(3) library used by
\fBOptiPNG\fP.
.TP
\fB\-zs\fP \fIstrategies\fP
Select the zlib compression strategies used in IDAT compression.
.br
The \fIstrategies\fP argument is specified as a rangeset (e.g. \fB\-zs0\-3\fP),
and the default \fIstrategies\fP value depends on the optimization level set by
the option \fB\-o\fP.
.br
The effect of this option is defined by the \fBzlib\fP(3) library used by
\fBOptiPNG\fP.
.TP
\fB\-zw\fP \fIsize\fP
Select the zlib window size (32k,16k,8k,4k,2k,1k,512,256) used in IDAT
compression.
.br
The \fIsize\fP argument can be specified either in bytes (e.g. 16384) or
kilobytes (e.g. 16k). The default \fIsize\fP value is set to the lowest
window size that yields an IDAT output as big as if yielded by the value 32768.
.br
The effect of this option is defined by the \fBzlib\fP(3) library used by
\fBOptiPNG\fP.
.SS "Editing options"
.TP
\fB\-set\fP \fIobject\fP=\fIvalue\fP
Set an image data object in a PNG file.
.br
TODO: Explain \fB\-set image.alpha.precision=\fP\fInum\fP, etc.
.TP
\fB\-reset\fP \fIobjects\fP
Reset image data objects in a PNG file.
.br
TODO: Explain \fB\-reset image.alpha\fP.
.TP
\fB\-strip\fP \fIobjects\fP
Strip metadata objects from a PNG file.
.br
PNG metadata is the information stored in any ancillary chunk except tRNS.
(tRNS represents the alpha channel, which, even if ignored in rendering, is
still a proper image channel in the RGBA color space.)
.br
The accepted \fIobjects\fP are either chunk names or the \fBall\fP object.
Multiple \fIobjects\fP can be comma-separated within a single \fB\-strip\fP
option, or split across multiple \fB\-strip\fP options.
.TP
\fB\-protect\fP \fIobjects\fP
Prevent metadata objects from being stripped.
.br
This option has priority over \fB\-strip\fP. For example, under
\fB\-strip\ all \-protect\ sRGB\fP, everything except \fCsRGB\fP is stripped;
under \fB\-strip\ all \-protect\ all\fP, nothing is stripped.
.br
The accepted \fIobjects\fP are either chunk names or the \fBall\fP object.
Multiple \fIobjects\fP can be comma-separated within a single \fB\-protect\fP
option, or split across multiple \fB\-protect\fP options.
.TP
\fB\-snip\fP
Cut one image out of multi-image, animation or video files.
.br
Depending on the input format, this may be either the first or the most
relevant (e.g. the largest) image.
.SS "Notes"
Option names are case-sensitive and may be abbreviated to their shortest unique
prefix. Option parsing stops at the first file name or at the option
\fB\-\-\fP, whichever comes first.
.P
Some options may have arguments that follow the option name, separated by
whitespace or the equal sign ('\fB=\fP'). If the option argument is a number
or a rangeset, the separator may be omitted. For example:
.IP
\fB\-out\fP \fCnewfile.png\fP \ <=> \ \fB\-out=\fP\fCnewfile.png\fP
.br
\fB\-o3\fP \ <=> \ \fB\-o 3\fP \ <=> \ \fB\-o=3\fP
.br
\fB\-f0,3\-5\fP \ <=> \ \fB\-f 0,3\-5\fP \ <=> \ \fB\-f=0,3\-5\fP
.P
Rangeset arguments are cumulative; e.g.
.IP
\fB\-f0 \-f3\-5\fP \ <=> \ \fB\-f0,3\-5\fP
.br
\fB\-zs0 \-zs1 \-zs2\-3\fP \ <=> \ \fB\-zs0,1,2,3\fP \ <=> \ \fB\-zs0\-3\fP

.SH "EXTENDED DESCRIPTION"
The PNG optimization algorithm consists of the following steps:
.TP 4
1.
Reduce the bit depth, the color type and the color palette of the image.
This step may reduce the size of the uncompressed image, which, indirectly, may
reduce the size of the compressed image (i.e. the size of the output PNG file).
.TP 4
2.
Run a suite of compression methods and strategies and select the compression
parameters that yield the smallest output file.
.TP 4
3.
Store all IDAT contents into a single chunk, eliminating the overhead
incurred by repeated IDAT headers and CRCs.
.TP 4
4.
Set the zlib window size inside IDAT to a mininum that does not affect the
compression ratio, reducing the memory requirements of PNG decoders.
.P
Not all of the above steps need to be executed. The behavior depends on the
actual input files and user options.
.P
Step 1 may be customized via the no-reduce options \fB\-nb\fP, \fB\-nc\fP,
\fB\-np\fP and \fB\-nx\fP. Step 2 may be customized via the \fB\-o\fP option,
and may be fine-tuned via the options \fB\-zc\fP, \fB\-zm\fP, \fB\-zs\fP and
\fB\-zw\fP. Step 3 is always executed. Step 4 is executed only if a new IDAT is
being created, and may be fine-tuned via the option \fB\-zw\fP.
.P
Extremely exhaustive searches are not generally expected to yield significant
improvements in compression ratio, and are recommended to advanced users only.
.P
The \fB\-o1\fP heuristic consists of picking the compression parameters that
are believed to produce the smallest IDAT. (Most other good PNG encoders use a
similar heuristic.) This heuristic works as follows:
.IP
Select the zlib compression level 9 (i.e. the highest available).
.br
Select the filter value 0 (\fINone\fP) for images encoded in palette mode or
with a bit depth less than 8; select the filter value 5 (\fIAll\fP) otherwise.
.br
Select the zlib memory level 8 and the zlib strategy 0
(\fCZ_DEFAULT_STRATEGY\fP) if the filter value is 0; select the zlib memory
level 9 and the zlib strategy 1 (\fCZ_FILTERED\fP) otherwise.

.SH "EXIT STATUS"
Upon program termination, the following exit codes shall be returned:
.TP
0
The execution terminated normally. The input files (if any) were either
successfully optimized or left intact.
.TP
1
One or more input files had errors, all of which were successfully fixed.
This can only happen if the \fB\-fix\fP option is enabled.
.TP
2
One or more input files had errors that were not fixed.
This can happen when the errors are too severe to recover, or the \fB\-fix\fP
option is not enabled.
.TP
64 (\fCEX_USAGE\fP)
The command line was incorrect.
.TP
66 (\fCEX_NOINPUT\fP)
A file or directory did not exist or was not readable.
.TP
69 (\fCEX_UNAVAILABLE\fP)
An unavailable or unimplemented program feature or service was requested.
.TP
70 (\fCEX_SOFTWARE\fP)
An unrecoverable internal software error (i.e. a severe bug) was detected.
.TP
71 (\fCEX_OSERR\fP)
A system error (e.g. a memory allocation failure) has occurred.
.TP
73 (\fCEX_CANTCREAT\fP)
A file or directory could not be created.
.P
Other sysexits may be added in the future.

.SH EXAMPLES
\fCoptipng file.png \ \ \ \ \ \fP# default speed
.br
\fCoptipng \-o4 file.png \ \fP# slow
.br
\fCoptipng \-o6 file.png \ \fP# very slow

.SH CAVEAT
Lossless image reductions are not completely implemented.
(This does \fInot\fP affect the integrity of the output files.)
Here are the missing pieces:
.IP
\- The color palette reductions are implemented only partially.
.br
\- The bit depth reductions below 8, for grayscale images, are not implemented
yet.
.P
Encoding of images whose total IDAT size exceeds 2GB is not supported.
.P
TIFF support is limited to uncompressed, PNG-compatible (grayscale, RGB and
RGBA) images.
.P
Metadata is not imported from the external image formats.
.P
There is no support for pipes or streams.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
\fBpng\fP(5),
\fBlibpng\fP(3),
\fBzlib\fP(3),
\fBpngcrush\fP(1),
\fBpngrewrite\fP(1).

.SH STANDARDS
The files produced by \fBOptiPNG\fP are compliant with \fBPNG\-2003\fP:
.br
Glenn Randers-Pehrson et al.
\fIPortable Network Graphics (PNG) Specification, Second Edition\fP.
.br
W3C Recommendation 10 November 2003; ISO/IEC IS 15948:2003 (E).
.br
\fChttp://www.w3.org/TR/PNG/\fP

.SH AUTHOR
\fBOptiPNG\fP is written and maintained by Cosmin Truta.
.PP
This manual page was originally written by Nelson A. de Oliveira
for the Debian Project. It was later updated by Cosmin Truta,
and is now part of the \fBOptiPNG\fP distribution.
